{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2868
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldItalicMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cspthree\c22\c0\c95960;\cspthree\c0\c0\c0;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28\fsmilli14346 \cf2 Adaptive Rapidly-Exploring-Random-Tree-Star\
(RRT*) -smart: algorithm characteristics and\
behavior analysis in complex environments\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 Jauwairia Nasir, Fahad Islam, Yasar Ayaz\

\fs19\fsmilli9963 Angaben zur Ver\'f6ffentlichung / Publication details:\
Nasir, Jauwairia, Fahad Islam, and Yasar Ayaz. 2013. \'93Adaptive\
Rapidly-Exploring-Random-Tree-Star (RRT*) -smart: algorithm characteristics\
and behavior analysis in complex environments.\'94 Asia-Pacific Journal of\
Information Technology and Multimedia 2 (2): 39\'9651.\
\cf3 https://doi.org/10.17576/apjitm-2013-0202-04\cf2 .\

\fs21\fsmilli10909 Nutzungsbedingungen / Terms of use:\

\fs11\fsmilli5978 Dieses Dokument wird unter folgenden Bedingungen zur Verf\'fcgung gestellt: / This document is made available under\
these conditions:\
CC-BY 4.0: Creative Commons: Namensnennung\
Weitere Informationen finden Sie unter: / For more information see:\
\cf3 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.de\

\fs17\fsmilli8966 \cf2 CC BY 4.0
\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs22\fsmilli11050 \cf2 https://doi.org/10.17576/apjitm-2013-0202-04\

\fs22\fsmilli11040 http://www.ftsm.ukm.my/apjitm\
Asia-Pacific Journal of Information Technology and Multimedia\

\f2\i Jurnal Teknologi Maklumat dan Multimedia Asia-Pasifik\

\f1\i0 Vol. 2 No. 2, December 2013 : 39 - 51\
e-ISSN: 2289-2192\

\fs28\fsmilli14053 ADAPTIVE RAPIDLY-EXPLORING-RANDOM-TREE-STAR (RRT*) -\
SMART: ALGORITHM CHARACTERISTICS AND BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS\
IN COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTS\

\fs22\fsmilli11050 JAUWAIRIA NASIR\
FAHAD ISLAM\
YASAR AYAZ\

\fs19\fsmilli9960 ABSTRACT\

\f2\i\fs19\fsmilli9969 Rapidly Exploring Random Trees (RRT) are regarded as one of the most efficient tools for planning feasible paths\
for mobile robots in complex obstacle cluttered environments. The recent development of its variant: RRT* is\
considered as a major breakthrough as it makes it possible to achieve optimality in paths planning. However, its\
limitations include the infinite time it takes to reach the optimal solution and a very slow rate of convergence. Just\
recently the authors have introduced RRT*\
-Smart which is a rapid convergence implementation of RRT* for\
improved efficient path planning both in terms of planning time as well as path cost. This paper presents a new\
scheme for RRT*\
-Smart that helps it to adapt to various types of environments by tuning its parameters during\
planning based on the information gathered online. The paper also includes detailed explanation of the\

\fs19\fsmilli9960 algorithm\'92s
\fs19\fsmilli9969  characteristics and statistical analysis of its behavior in different environment types including mazes,\
narrow passages and obstacle cluttered environments in comparison with RRT*\
. Navigation experiments using\
the real Pioneer 3-AT Mobile Robot provide a proof of the concept.\
Keywords
\f3\b\fs19\fsmilli9960 : 
\f2\b0\fs19\fsmilli9969 RRT*\
, Adaptive Sampling, Robot Motion Planning, Biasing Radius, Path Optimization, Biasing Ratio.\

\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12011 INTRODUCTION\
The forthcoming era of domestic robotics comes with high expectations from robots to acquire\
the ability to assist humans in various complex tasks of daily life. For an autonomous robot to\
safely and optimally navigate through obstacle cluttered everyday terrains such as homes and\
offices is one of the most fundamental of requirements towards the achievement of this aim.\
Motion planning for mobile robots is mainly concerned with finding a path for a robot\
or an autonomous agent in such a way that the robot or the agent will follow that path to move\
to the goal configuration from its initial configuration without colliding with obstacles or other\
agents in the environment. Over the last thirty to forty years, many motion planning algorithms\
have been introduced with some of the popular ones being grid-based algorithms (Kanehara,\
2007), visibility graphs (Latombe, 1991), potential field algorithms (Hwang, 1992), neural\
networks (Yang, 2004), and sampling based algorithms (Geraerts, 2004). Algorithms may be\
compared and their pros and cons may be weighed based upon factors such as computational\
time, computational complexity, cost heuristics, planning time etc.\
A-Star algorithm has been one of the most popular and the most widely used techniques since\
its introduction. It is being used in computer games to autonomous vehicles. Rapidly Exploring\
Random Tree (RRT) (Lavalle, 1998) introduced in 1998 by Lavelle is considered another\
popular and widely used algorithms. In fact, sampling based algorithms, RRT being one of\
them, generally gained much popularity because of their less computational complexity and\
their ability to find paths without specific information of the obstacles in the configuration\
space. Instead, they make obstacle free trajectories leading to a roadmap between sampled\
configurations in the obstacle free region. Though RRT has the advantage in providing the\
quickest first path and also probabilistic completeness but it does not ensure asymptotic\
39
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12012 \cf2 optimality. In 2011, Karaman and Farazolli overcame this problem of asymptotic optimality by\
introducing the extended version of RRT known as RRT*\
. Rapidly Exploring Random Tree\
Star made it possible to reach an optimal solution but to do so, it has been proven to take an\
infinite time (Karaman, 2011). RRT*\
-Smart which is used for solving the limitation of infinite\
time and provides a significantly faster rate of convergence proved to of benefit both in terms\
of cost and time as compared to RRT* in various environments (Islam, 2012). This is achieved\
by introducing two new concepts Intelligent Biasing and Path Optimization. This study presents\
a dynamic biasing ratio scheme for RRT*\
-Smart which leads to more efficient results and also\
makes the algorithms parameter, biasing ratio, independent of the environment leading to a\
balanced trade-off between the exploration rate and biasing rate.\
This paper is organized into the following sections. Section 2 presents a brief\
background of RRT* and RRT*\
-Smart. Section 3 discusses the characteristics of the latter\
algorithm in detail in addition to their effect on the behavior and efficiency of RRT*\
-Smart.\
Section 4 presents the dynamic scheme for the algorithm while Section 5 discusses the\
complexity of the algorithm in detail. Comparison between the two algorithms in complex\
environments using t-test is presented in Section 5 and Section 6 covers the hardware\
implementation of the algorithm on P3-AT. Section 7 presents possible future avenues.\
ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION\
This section describes the RRT* motion planning algorithm and its rapid convergence\
implementation RRT*\
-Smart.\

\fs19\fsmilli9970 RRT*\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 RRT* is one of the recent incremental sampling based algorithm which is quick to find an intial\
path and then later works to improve and optimize this path as the execution takes place\
(Karaman, 2011).\
Let X defines the configuration space in which X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 goal ,\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 obs
\fs24\fsmilli12012  and X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 =X/X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 obstacle
\fs24\fsmilli12012  is the\
goal region, the obstacle region and the obstacle-free region respectively. RRT* works to find\
an input u: [0:T] 
\fs24 \uc0\u1013 
\fs24\fsmilli12012  U that yields a feasible path x(t) 
\fs24 \uc0\u1013 
\fs24\fsmilli12012  X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free
\fs24\fsmilli12012 . This path starts from x(0) = x-initial\
to x(T)= goal following the system constraints. A tree 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 = (V, E) constituting of a set of vertices\
V sampled from the obstacle-free region X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 and edges E that connect these vertices together\
is being maintained by RRT* as it tries to find this solution. Algorithm 1 is the Pseudocode\
describing RRT*\
. This algorithm makes use of the following set of procedure.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Sampling:
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  In this procedure a state z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u1013 
\fs24\fsmilli12012  X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free is 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 randomly sampled from the obstacle-\
free region.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Distance:
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  This procedure returns the cost of the path in terms of euclidean distance\
between two states considering the region between them is obstacle free.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 \cf4 Nearest Neighbor
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 : The procedure Nearest (
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) returns the node from 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 =(V, E)\
which is the nearest from z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012  in terms of the cost which is calculated by the distance function.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Steer:
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  The procedure Steer (z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) works to solve for a control input u[0,T] that\
drives the system from x(0)=z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 to x(T)=z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012  along the path 
\fs24 x: [0,T] \uc0\u8594  X giving z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 at a\

\fs24 distance \uc0\u8710 q from z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012  towards z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand 
\fs24 where \uc0\u8710 q is the incremental distance.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Collision Check:
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  The function Obstaclefree(x) is in charge to find out whether a path\
x:[0,T] lies in the obstacle-free region X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free
\fs24\fsmilli12012  for all t=0 to t=T.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Near-by Vertices:
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  The function Near(
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , n) returns a set of the nearby neighboring\

\fs24 nodes that lie in a ball of volume (\uc0\u946  (logn/n)) around z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 where \uc0\u946  is a constant that depends on\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 the planner.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Insert node:
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  The procedure Insertnode(z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 parent
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) adds a node z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012  to V in the tree\

\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  =(V, E) and joins it to an already existent node z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 parent 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 as its parent, and adds this edge to E. A\
\cf2 40
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12012 \cf2 cost which is the sum of the cost of its parent and the Euclidean cost that is returned by the\
Distance function between z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012  and its parent z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 parent
\fs24\fsmilli12012  is assigned to z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new.\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 Rewire : 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 The function Rewire(
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) checks if the cost to the nodes in Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 is less through z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012  as compared to their older costs. If that is a case for any node, that nodes\
parent z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 parent
\fs24\fsmilli12012  is changed to z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new.\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Apart from ensuring probablistic completeness, RRT* also guarantees asymptotic\
optimality which is in contrast to its predecessor RRT and other augmented versions of RRT.\
Although, based on the fact that it has made it possible to approach an optimal solution, it is\
considered a landmark sampling based algorithm but it has been proven mathematically that it\
reaches the said solution in infinite time [Karaman, 2011]. Approaching the optimal solution at\
a significantly faster rate, RRT*\
-Smart looks to outrun these limitations.\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 Algorithm 1: 
\f2\i\b0\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 = (V, E)
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 RRT*(
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012 z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 init
\fs24\fsmilli12012 )\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 1
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  InitializeTree();\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 2
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  InsertNode(\'d8, z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 init
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 3
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 for
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  i=0 to i=N 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 do\
4
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Sample(i);\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 5
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Nearest(
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 6
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  (x
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , u
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , T
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24 ) \uc0\u8592  Steer (z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 7
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 if
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  Obstaclefree(x
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 then\
8
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Near(
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , |V|);\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 9 
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012 z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Chooseparent (Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , x
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 10 
\f2\i\b0\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\fs24\fsmilli12011  
\f1\i0\fs24 \uc0\u8592  InsertNode(z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 11 
\f2\i\b0\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Rewire (
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 12
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 return
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 \

\f1\i0\fs19\fsmilli9970 RRT*\
-SMART\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Now we briefly describe the RRT*\
-Smart algorithm along with the two proposed key concepts:\
Intelligent Sampling and Path Optimization. Initially, random search of the state space takes\
place as RRT* does until the first path is found. Once this initial path is found, it works to\
optimize this path by interconnecting the directly visible nodes in this path. Biasing points for\
intelligent sampling are yielded from this optimized path. At these biasing points, sampling\
takes place at regular intervals, which are governed by a constant 
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 b 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 that in turn depends upon\
the biasing ratio explained later. As the algorithm progresses, this process continues and the\
path keeps on being optimized. The biasing shifts towards the new path whenever a shorter path\
is found. Algorithm 2 outlines this process.\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 Algorithm 2: 
\f2\i\b0\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12011 = (V,E)
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 RRT*Smart(
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012 z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 init
\fs24\fsmilli12012 )\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 1
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  InitializeTree();\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 2
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  InsertNode(\'d8, z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 init
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 3
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 for
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  i=0 to i=N 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 do\
4
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 if
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 i=n+b, n+2b, n+3b\'85. 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 then\
5
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Sample(i, z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacons
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 6
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 else\
7
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Sample(i);\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 8
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Nearest(
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 9
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  (x
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , u
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , T
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24 ) \uc0\u8592  Steer (z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 rand
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 10
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 if
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  Obstaclefree(x
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12005 then\
11
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Near(
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , |V|);\
41
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 \cf2 12 
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012 z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Chooseparent (Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 nearest
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , x
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 13 
\f2\i\b0\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\fs24\fsmilli12008  
\f1\i0\fs24 \uc0\u8592  InsertNode(z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , 
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 14 
\f2\i\b0\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Rewire (
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 near
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 min
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 15 if
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  InitialPathFound 
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 then\
16
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 n \uc0\u8592  i;\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 17
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  (
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0 , directcost) \uc0\u8592  PathOptimization(
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 init
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 goal
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 18
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 if
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  (directcost
\fs16\fsmilli8048 new 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 < directcost
\fs16\fsmilli8048 old
\fs24\fsmilli12012 )\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 19 
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012 z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacons 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  PathOptimization(
\f2\i \uc0\u428 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 init
\fs24\fsmilli12012 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 goal
\fs24\fsmilli12012 );\

\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 20
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f4\b\fs24\fsmilli12004 return
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\f2\i\fs24 \uc0\u428 \

\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 The lines 1, 2, 3 and 7 to 14 execute in the same way as the corresponding ones in RRT* do.\
The function 
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12008 InitialPathFound
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  , in line 15, returns the iteration number 
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12008 n
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  at which the first path\
is found. The algorithm starts biased sampling based on this information. This biased sampling\
then starts with an interval time defined by the constant 
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12008 b
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 . The function 
\f2\i\fs24 (\uc0\u428 , directcost) \u8592 \
PathOptimization(\uc0\u428 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 init
\fs24\fsmilli12008 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 goal
\fs24\fsmilli12008 )
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  determines an optimized path by directly connecting the nodes\
in the path that are visible to each other i.e.there is no obstacle between the nodes and are\
directly connectable without any intermediate node. The function returns its cost in terms of\
euclidean distance (line 17). In lines 18-19, the function 
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12008 z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 beacons 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  PathOptimization(\u428 , z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 init
\fs24\fsmilli12008 ,\
z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 goal
\fs24\fsmilli12008 )
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012  returns the
\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12008  beacons 
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 (the nodes which form the basis for intelligent sampling) if the new\
cost is less than the old cost; otherwise the old beacons keep on biasing the tree. In lines 4-5,\

\f2\i\fs24\fsmilli12008 z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 rand 
\fs24 \uc0\u8592  Sample (i, z
\fs16\fsmilli8045 beacons
\fs24\fsmilli12008 )
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 , samples are being generated at the beacons within a ball of radius\
R
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacons 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 centered at z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacons 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 which is known as biasing radius\

\fs16\fsmilli8048 .\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 The intelligent sampling takes\
place with a certain percentage once the initial beacons are found i.e. after every few samples\
that are placed in the normal way as for RRT* (lines 7-9), one sample is spawned in the region\
surrounding the beacons. This percentage is defined by biasing ratio.This is to be discussed\
later.\
ALGORITHM CHARACTERISTICS\
In this section, the two most important characteristics of the algorithm, biasing radius and\
biasing ratio, are explained in detail with tabular examples to give a better understanding of\
how the two factors affect the efficiency of the algorithm.\

\fs19\fsmilli9970 BIASING RADIUS\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Biasing radius is the radius of sphere within which biasing takes place around Z
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacon
\fs24\fsmilli12012 . The radius\
R
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacon
\fs24\fsmilli12012  
\fs24 can be chosen according to the planner\'92s requirements. For a relatively larger R
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacon
\fs24\fsmilli12012  in\
a configuration Space, the path has a greater chance of moving quickly towards an optimum\
path as the biasing starts, and as the iterations continue, the convergence rate slows down. On\
the other hand, when the radius R
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacon
\fs24\fsmilli12012  is kept small for the same configuration space, the\
convergence rate of the path towards an optimum path will be slower as the biasing starts but\
once an optimum enough path is found, it is certain to reach an optimized path and also at a\
faster rate towards the end as compared to when the radius R
\fs16\fsmilli8048 beacon 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 was kept large.\
This might be seen as a trade off between the planning time and the navigation time. If,\
for example, a motion planning and navigation problem are put up, which could be solved by\
using this algorithm and which is more concerned about reducing planning time rather than\
navigation time, then the better solution is a larger radius and vice versa. However, there is a\

\fs24 limit to increasing the radius as if it is increased to a large value, the algorithm\'92s behaviour\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 becomes identical to that of RRT*\
. For one of the many environments used for\
experimentation, the experimental results for various biasing radius vs number of iterations to\
42
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12012 \cf2 reach the same cost is presented in a tabulated form in Table 1. As the size of radius is increased\
beyond a certain level, the number of iterations required to reach the optimum cost increases\
significantly hence approaching the trend of RRT* as for biasing radius of 25 in the table shown\
below.\
A biasing radius in the range of 10-15 is used for all the experiments performed in a\
configuration space of the same size. A good approximation is to use a biasing radius in\
accordance with the size of the configuration space.\

\fs13\fsmilli6967 TABLE 1. 
\fs18\fsmilli9009 No. of iterations for different biasing radius to achieve the same cost of 450 at a biasing ratio of 2.\
Biasing Radius Number of Iterations Cost\
11 4300 540\
13 4600 540\
15 5200 540\
17 8000 540\
25 40000 540\

\fs19\fsmilli9970 BIASING RATIO\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Biasing ratio determines the number of times a sample will be spawned directly at a beacon\
instead of being sampled normally. For a constant biasing ratio throughout the entire planning\
phase, the choice depends upon the planner. It must be noted that changing this ratio does affect\
the trend of reaching optimality.\
The effect of choosing different constant biasing ratio for the same obstacle environment\
is evident from the results shown in table 2. These results have been obtained by using one of\
the many representative environments used for experimentation and analysis.\
The results shown above demonstrate that for the same environment, there exists an\
optimized value of biasing ratio that balances the rate of biasing and exploration to give the\
optimum/near optimum cost. Any value of biasing ratio that is above or below this optimized\
value will get the optimum/near-optimum solution using a larger number of iterations.\
There are two biasing schemes for the algorithm : static biasing ratio scheme and\
dynamic biasing ratio scheme. The basic idea behind the generic scheme of dynamic biasing\
ratio is to cater for the limitations of constant biasing ratio scheme.\

\fs13\fsmilli6967 TABLE 2. 
\fs18\fsmilli9009 No. of iterations for different biasing ratio to achieve the same optimal cost of 408\
Biasing Ratio Number of Iterations Cost\
5 23000 408\
7 17300 408\
10 21600 408\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 GENERIC DYNAMIC BIASING RATIO SCHEME\
This is the second and the latest biasing scheme introduced for RRT*\
-Smart. By introducing\
intelligent sampling, a tradeoff has been set between the rate of convergence and the rate of\
exploration as explained earlier in this section. To reach an optimal solution, it is not only\
necessary to converge at a faster rate through strong biasing but the exploration of the\
configuration space is equally important. The complexity of an environment is directly related\
to this challenge of choosing a suitable biasing ratio to optimize the output. It has been seen\
that in complex environments
\f4\b\fs24  
\f1\b0\fs24\fsmilli12012 including a large number of obstacles, the algorithm employing\
static biasing ratio scheme may give the worst results. To overcome this challenge, a scheme\
of dynamic biasing ratio has been presented. Instead of being static, it would keep on changing\
43
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12012 \cf2 as the number of iterations take place depending upon some parameters. It is approximated to\
give the best results in almost all scenarios.\
A scheme has been developed based upon the heuristic that the dynamic biasing ratio\
should be a function of the obstacle-free space X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free 
\fs24\fsmilli12012 and the number of iterations n. For the\
dynamic biasing scheme\
Biasing ratio= (n/ X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free
\fs24\fsmilli12012 ) x constant (1)\
The factor n/ X
\fs16\fsmilli8048 free
\fs24\fsmilli12012  determines the space density at any point in time. When the environment is\
not explored, minimal biasing takes place. As the space density increases with the increase in\
n, biasing ratio also increases. Note that, at a high value of n, majority of the configuration\
space has been explored so at this point the algorithm focuses at intelligent biasing instead of\
exploration.\

\fs13\fsmilli6967 FIGURE 1. 
\fs18\fsmilli9009 RRT*\
-Smart in various obstacle Environments with constant biasing ratio\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 44
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs13\fsmilli6967 \cf2 FIGURE 2.
\f4\b\fs13\fsmilli6960  
\f1\b0\fs18\fsmilli9009 RRT*\
-Smart in various obstacle Environments with dynamic biasing ratio\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Some representative environments comparing both the schemes are shown in Figure 1 and\
Figure 2. RRT*\
-Smart achieves optimization for each of the four scenarios first using the static\
biasing ratio in Figure 1 and then a dynamic biasing ratio in Figure 2 which is calculated with\
the help of Equation (1). For dynamic biasing ratio, as the number of iterations increases, the\
biasing ratio increases, i.e. the rate at which the nodes are being placed at beacons is now much\
faster and keeps on accelerating. This implies that as the space is being explored, the biasing\
increases thus reaching an approximation to provide optimization for the tradeoff between the\
space exploration rate and intelligent sampling rate. A comparison between the two schemes\
shows that the latter is able to reach the optimum cost in fewer iterations in all four\
environments.\
This scheme is intended to achieve an optimization for the tradeoff between the biasing rate\
and the exploration rate in most environments, thus, it makes the algorithm independent and\
more efficient by choosing a biasing ratio according to the environment itself.\
COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS\
The Space and Time Complexity of RRT* as demonstrated in (Karaman, 2011) is given by O\
(n) and O (nlogn). Mathematical analysis shows that the Space and Time complexity of RRT*\
-\
Smart also comes out to be the same but for acquiring the same optimality, the value of n, in\
case of RRT*\
-Smart, is significantly reduced; hence it yields better performance than RRT*\
.\

\fs19\fsmilli9970 SPACE COMPLEXITY\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Space complexity of any algorithm is the amount of memory that is required by the algorithm\
to execute. Clearly it can be seen by the discussion that RRT*\
-Smart requires n number of\
memory configurations for n number of iterations to execute. Hence showing a linear Space\
Complexity of O (n) just like RRT*\
.\
45
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs19\fsmilli9970 \cf2 TIME COMPLEXITY\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Time complexity of an algorithm is defined as the amount of time that is required by the\
algorithm to execute a problem of size n. The additional steps of path optimization, intelligent\
sampling and the collision checking method of interpolation that have been introduced in\
RRT*\
-Smart have complexities that are insignificant enough to not have an effect on the\
complexity of the algorithm. Rather, by the analysis of the T-Notation for both RRT* and\
RRT*\
-Smart, it can be observed why for the same number of iterations the time for RRT*\
-\
Smart is significantly less as compared to RRT*\
.\

\fs19\fsmilli9970 COMPLEXITY OF PATH OPTIMIZATION STEP\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Path optimization technique is applied whenever a new smaller path as compared to the\
previous one is found.\

\fs13\fsmilli6967 TABLE 3. 
\fs18\fsmilli9009 A comparison of values of delta and 
\f2\i\fs18 n
\f1\i0\fs18\fsmilli9009  in three different obstacle scenarios\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 Test\
Environm\
ents\
Optimized\
Cost\
Iterations Required\
(
\f2\i\fs24 n
\f1\i0\fs24\fsmilli12012 )\
Delta Result\
Circular 237 9100 17 Delta<<n\
Potential 382 7500 22 Delta<<n\
Cluttered 408 13000 55 Delta<<n\
Let us assume that the new path is found for Delta number of times. The computational\
complexity of this step be given by:\
Delta x Direct cost\
Where:\
Direct cost = \{f x yf/2 x (Cost of each collision check)\}\
yf = number of nodes in the RRT* path found for each iteration f.\
f = number of times the iterative process is repeated for each path until all the visible nodes are\
directly connected.\
The computational cost of each collision check between the nodes under consideration\
will always be some finite value. As the path will move towards optimization, the direct cost\
will reduce with time. It is interesting to note here that the upper bound of Delta depends upon\
the particular environment but will always be significantly less than the total number of\
iterations n and would always be a finite value for reaching an optimal solution in a particular\
obstacle scenario. This is because the number of times the path or the paths which lead to\
optimal solution get optimized will be finite and significantly small in comparison to n. Hence,\
rendering this term is ineffective in terms of computational complexity as it is independent of\
the number of iterations n.\
Delta <<< n\
This is supported by statistical results for three different obstacle scenarios shown in Table\
3. In each of these scenarios, the algorithm is executed until the optimized path is found.\

\fs19\fsmilli9970 COMPLEXITY OF INTELLIGENT SAMPLING STEP\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 46
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12011 \cf2 Let p be a constant which defines the number of times a node will be placed at a beacon. This\
depends on the constant b. The greater the biasing ratio, the greater will be the value of p for\
the same configuration space and number of iterations. So the complexity of this time may be\
given by p*c where c is a constant time to place a sample.\
Reduced complexity of Sample, Nearest and Steer Step:\
Each of these steps will now execute (n-p) times as p times the nodes are being placed\
directly at the beacons zbeacons whereas n is equal to the total number of iterations. Though\
this does not affect the O-Notation in any way but explains the reduced computational\
complexity and one of the factors that leads to reduced execution time.\
Thus, it can be concluded that the O-Notation for the time complexity of RRT*\
-Smart is\
unaffected by the additional steps though performance has been improved as\
1. n is significantly reduced and\
2. Execution of RRT* sample step, nearest step and steer step has been reduced by a factor\
p and replaced by a single step with the same computational complexity as that of RRT* sample\
step and a path optimization step which has an insignificant contribution as Delta <<< n.\

\fs13\fsmilli6966 TABLE 4. 
\fs18\fsmilli9008 A comparison of values of delta and 
\f2\i\fs18 n
\f1\i0\fs18\fsmilli9008  in three different obstacle scenarios\
Maze\
(Figure 3 a, c)\
Narrow Passage\
(Figure 3 b, d)\
Environment Algorithm Iterations Minimum Maximum Average\
Standard\
Deviation\
RRT*\
-Smart\
664 672 668 2.97\
2000\
RRT* 720 727 722 2.95\
RRT*\
-Smart\
597 607 602 4.34\
2500\
RRT* 631 637 633 2.28\
RRT*\
-Smart\
575 582 578 2.77\
t value z\
28.8 2.31\
15.2 2.31\
Cluttered with 5\
obstacles\
(Figure 4 a, e)\
2000\
14.4 2.31\
RRT* 601 610 606 3.21\
Cluttered with 50\
obstacles\
(Figure 4 b, f)\
RRT*\
-Smart\
603 609 607 2.49\
2000\
11.0 2.31\
RRT* 621 627 624 2.45\
Cluttered with 100\
obstacles\
(Figure 4 c, g)\
RRT*\
-Smart\
583 591 588 3.13\
2000\
36.3 2.31\
RRT* 662 672 666 3.70\
Cluttered with 200\
obstacles\
(Figure 4 d, h)\
RRT*\
-Smart\
601 605 603 2\
2500\
18.8 2.31\
RRT* 631 639 635 3.29\

\fs24\fsmilli12011 COMPARISON OF RRT* WITH RRT*\
-SMART IN COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTS\
After the analysis of the algorithm characteristics, introduction of dynamic biasing scheme for\
RRT*\
-Smart and complexity analysis, we would now compare the two algorithms in three\
different environments including a maze, a narrow passage and a cluttered environment (with\
increasing number of obstacles) each solved for at least 5 times. Figure 3 shows the results for\
one particular instance out of the five experiments performed in a Maze and a narrow passage\
environment for both RRT*\
-Smart and RRT*\
. In Figure 3 (a,c), the red hollow box represents\
the goal region while in Figure 3 (b,d), S and G denote the starting point and the goal position\
respectively. Similarly, Figure 4 compares the two algorithms in the cluttered environment,\
again for one particular instance, with increasing number of obstacles. In each figure, the\
obstacles are represented in red color, the goal region is shown by a red box and the trajectory\
is represented in black. The results are then summarized in Table 4 followed by a statistical\
analysis of t-Student test for testing equality of the means of the two methods. This statistical\
test called t-Student test is often used by the researchers and scientists to assess whether two\
47
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12012 \cf2 groups significantly differ from one another. We performed an unpaired t-test between the two\
sets of samples, one for RRT*\
-Smart and the other for RRT*\
. Each set consists of 5 values of\
path costs calculated after solving that particular environment for 5 times considering the\
stochastic nature of the methods and the costs in each case contributes to the data that is used\
to perform this test. The minimum, maximum, average and standard deviation values, the t-\
value for each experiment along with the reference tabulated value z for 95 % confidence level\
and at 8 degrees of freedom are presented in Table I. Comparing the value of t with the\
tabulated value of 2.31 (p=0.05) going upto a tabulated value of 5.04 (0.001), we see that the\
value of our t exceeds these in each case. Thus, according to the principles t-test theory, the\
difference between the means is very significant and so clearly RRT*\
-Smart provides\
significantly improved costs as compared to RRT* for the same number of iterations.\

\fs13\fsmilli6967 FIGURE. 3
\fs18\fsmilli9009 . A comparison of RRT* and RRT*\
-Smart using simulation results in environments with maze and narrow path.\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 48
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs13\fsmilli6960 \cf2 FIGURE 4
\fs19\fsmilli9960 . A comparison of RRT* and RRT*-Smart using simulation results in cluttered environments with\
increasing number of obstacles\

\fs24 49
\f0 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12012 \cf2 HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION\
Now the results of hardware implementation of RRT*\
-Smart algorithm on Pioneer 3AT mobile\
robotic platform controlled by Player Project to prove its viability is given. An overhead camera\
is used for environment perception. The image of an environment is taken from the camera as\
in Figure 5(a). This image is converted into binary image and using image dilation technique\
the obstacle size is enlarged keeping into consideration the kinodynamic constraints (Oliveira\
Vaz, 2010) of the robot shown in Figure 5(b) and (c) respectively. Then the RRT*\
-Smart\
algorithm functions to come up with a collision free near-optimum path is shown in Figure 5(d).\
The robot follows this generated trajectory.\

\fs13\fsmilli6967 FIGURE 5. 
\fs18\fsmilli9009 Results of hardware implementation of RRT*\
-Smart algorithm on Pioneer 3AT mobile robotic platform.\

\fs24\fsmilli12012 CONCLUSION\
Since its introduction, the sampling based algorithms have been popular in motion planning and\
navigation problems. Significant contribution was made by RRT* as it achieves asymptotical\
optimality apart from probabilistic completeness, but infinite time is needed because of the slow\
convergence rate. RRT*\
-Smart, a recent algorithm, tries to overcome these limitations by\
introducing intelligent sampling and path optimization.\
The dynamic biasing ratio scheme for RRT*\
-Smart has been proven for being able to\
further improves its efficiency apart from making it independent of the environment. Also, the\
complexity analysis of RRT*\
-Smart and its characteristics could impact the behavior of the\
algorithm. A rigorous comparison has also proved the efficiency of the latter algorithm over\
RRT* in complex environments. Thus, it is proven easy to implement algorithm on hardware\
platforms.\
50
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \page 
\f1\fs24\fsmilli12009 \cf2 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT\
The authors would like to thank Alejandro Perez and Matthew Walter of MIT CSAIL for their\
help regarding RRT* which much improved our understanding of the algorithm.\

\fs22\fsmilli11049 REFERENCES\
Geraerts, R. 2006 Sampling-based Motion Planning: Analysis and Path Quality. PhD thesis, Utrecht\
University.\
Hwang, Y.K. and Ahuja, N. 1992. A potential field approach to path planning
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 . IEEE Transactions on\
Robotics and Automation
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 , vol. 8(1): 23-32.\
Islam, F., Nasir, J., Malik, U., Ayaz, Y., and Hasan, O. 2012. RRT*\
-Smart: Rapid Convergence\
Implementation of RRT* Towards Optimal Solution. 
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 Proceedings of
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049  
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 IEEE
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049  
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 International\
Conference of Mechatronics and Automation.
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049  Chengdu, China: IEEE, pp.1651-1656.\
Kanehara, M. Kagami, S., Kuffner, J.J., Thompson, S., and Mizoguhi, H. 2007. Path shortening and\
smoothing of grid-based path planning with consideration of obstacles. 
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 IEEE International\
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 , 2007 (ISIC), Montreal, pp.991-996.\
Karaman, S. and Frazzoli, E. 2011. Sampling-based Algorithms for Optimal Motion Planning.\

\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 International Journal of Robotics Research
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 , vol. 30(7):846-894.\
\cf4 Latombe, J.C. 1991. 
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 Robot Motion Planning. 
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 Boston:Kluwer Academic Publishers.\
Lavalle, S.M. 1998. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning. 
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 Technical Report
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 .\
Computer Science Dept, Iowa State University, 98
\fs22\fsmilli11040 \'96
\fs22\fsmilli11049 11.\
Vaz,O.D.B, Inoue, R.S. and Grassi Jr., V. 2010. Kinodynamic Motion Planning of a Skid-Steering\
Mobile RobotUsing RRTs. 
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 Latin American Robotics Symposium and Intelligent Robotics\
Meeting
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 , Centro Universitario da FEI Sao Bernardo do Campo, Brazil, pp. 73
\fs22\fsmilli11040 \'96
\fs22\fsmilli11049 78.\
Yang, S.X., Luo, C., 2004. A neural network approach to complete coverage path planning. 
\f2\i\fs22\fsmilli11050 IEEE\
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics
\f1\i0\fs22\fsmilli11049 , vol.34(1):718-724\

\fs24\fsmilli12009 Jauwairia Nasir,\
Fahad Islam,\
Yasar Ayaz.\
Robotics and Intelligent Systems Engineering (RISE) Lab,\
Department of Robotics and Artificial Intelligence,\
School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering (SMME),\
National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST),\
Main Campus, Sector H-12, Islamabad, 44000, Pakistan.\
08beejnasir@seecs.edu.pk, 08beefahad@seecs.edu.pk, yasar@smme.nust.edu.pk\
\cf2 51}